---
categories:
  - Agriculture
title: "Forecasting famine during a food glut"
date: 2017-09-27T21:00:27-07:00
draft: false
---

Reuters just released a special story about the [historic levels of
food
stocks](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-grains-supply-special-report/special-report-drowning-in-grain-how-big-ag-sowed-seeds-of-a-profit-slashing-glut-idUSKCN1C21AR?),
and the associated drop in agricultural profits, both at the farm and
the farm services level. This is interesting to me because almost all
of the papers I have written and the research I have done has been
motivated by the need to produce more food to feed the growing
population. Many influential papers in agriculture have highlighted
the coming food shortages, the need to double food production by 2050,
etc. Almost every presentation, every correspondence, every poster in
agricultural science at least mentions the coming challenges.

So were we wrong?

# Land-sparing vs. Land-sharing

There has long been a debate in Ag science if we should focus on
harvesting more food, fuel, and fiber from lands currently under
cultivation so that less land needs to be cultivated (land-sparing),
or if we should make our practices less impactful, even if that means
more land needs to be cultivated (land-sharing).

The debate has not been resolved in academia, but
Monsanto/Syngenta/Pioneer-DuPont aren't waiting around. The story
makes it clear they are pushing the limits of growing season length,
which enables the successful cultivation of maize in short-season
environments. We might soon be farming maize inside the Arctic Circle.

So, crisis averted, right?

# The issues with land-sharing

Despite our best efforts, some impacts of cultivating the land seem
unavoidable. Concerns such as:

  - Loss of soil organic carbon
  - Loss of biodiversity
  - Reduced functional diversity
  - Altered hydrology
  - etc.
  
have all been observed when natural areas are brought into
cultivation. But as highly intensified systems approach their limit,
we might not have a choice. The theory has been that food shortages
will drive up prices, which in turn will incentivize the expansion of
land under cultivation. The expansion of maize towards the Arctic
Circle follows the expected path. Almost... 

# The unexpected (at least to me)

What surprised me was that hold-over policy and technological
improvements have driven farm-profits down even as land expansion is
continuing. Research is a slow moving ship, and efforts started during
food shortages are coming to fruition only recently. Agronomists
generally believe in the wisdom of the crowd - each farmer is acting
rationally, and therefore the system largely follows a rational path.

But now I am reconsidering - how can the system collectively move
counter to the interest of most of the actors involved?





